Nowadays, chaos research has been approaching mature, and scientists believed that chaos exists in universe . It applied not only to physical problems such as the trajectories of objects in turbulent media, but also to problems in biology, mathematics, chemistry,engineering, medicine, astronomy , music and even business. Since nonlinearity is universal in nature, there probably exists chaos wherever there are matter flow,energy flow and information flow.Discovery of Lorenz system  has brought rich interests of research in chaos. However, only a few researchers have investigated the mechanics and physical background of chaos.Mostresearches have focused on the dynamics. In the past 15 years, chaos research has achieved a great development in the perspectives of generation of numerical chaotic system, analysis of chaos dynamics, circuit implementation, chaos-based cryptography application, etc. As regards chaos generation, there have appeared many chaotic models, such as Chen system , Lü system , Qi 3-D four-wing chaotic system  and some hyperchaotic system . These systems could be categorized into multi-scroll chaotic systems and multi-wing chaotic systems, etc.
Generally speaking, the generations of these systems have been structured based on existing systems, for instance Lorenz system, Chua circuit or Rössler system (even if Rössler system was corned through computer simulation too). A series of chaos have been tentatively made by route of increasing linear term or nonlinear terms or dimension and confirmed by numerical simulations . The researchers have strived for new shapes or complex topological construction of chaotic attractors, such as multi-wing or multi-scroll , or stronger pseudorandom characteristics than the previously existing ones, or amplitude controllable chaotic systems by modifying the degree of one or more of the terms . These constitutions have attracted much research once.
To distinguish, a system is called physical chaotic system, if it is derived from physical process or sustained in physical background; otherwise, the system is called numerical chaotic system when it is made by simulation. The main focus of research of chaos is the dynamical analysis for these numerical chaotic systems, even for the Lorenz system. Although a few
literature has researched application of meteorology, analyzed fluid dynamics , energy cycles ,
analogs of laser and brushless DC motors ,most researchers have paid attention to the dynamics of Lorenz system, and this trend is especially true for the research of newly corned chaotic systems. The research methodologies usually are numerical calculation, analysis of boundary, aperiodic solution, sensitivity of initial, bifurcation, power spectrum, circuit implementation, Lyapunov exponent calculation, fractal dimension, fractional order, proof of chaos property applying of Smale horseshoe, system control and synchronization, etc. Lü et al.studied the compound structure of chaotic attractor by merging together two simple attractors after performing a mirror operation. The investigation is based on the topological structure of the attractor without considering the physical background. Through searching literature, almost no research has been found regarding the mechanics such as energy conservation, physical meanings and background, transformation among internal energy, dissipation and external force by far. The physical meanings include these terms: mass, position, time, force (or torque), velocity, momentum, etc. These terms are understandable, and furthermore, they correspond to measurable quantities which can be ascribed to, or associated with, objects in the world around us. Question is what terms are reflected in these numerical chaotic systems. Often the parameter bifurcation being studied, what does the parameter mean in physical background?
Mechanics deals with the dynamics of particles,rigid bodies, continuous media (fluid, plasma and solid), studies the transformation of different types of energy and forces and clarifies the physical meanings. Chaotic system is fairly comprehensive in terms of structure of terms and interaction. If chaos is investigated in mechanics, much more fundamentals could be discovered.
Arnold presented a Kolmogorov system describing dissipative-forced dynamical systems or
hydro-dynamic instability with Hamiltonian function. Pasini and Pelino have analyzed the Lorenz system and gave a unified view of Kolmogorov and Lorenz systems, and furthermore, Pelino et al.  presented the energy cycle of Lorenz system employing the Kolmogorov system. Therefore, Hamiltonian function and Kolmogorov system are a good start to study chaotic system in terms of mechanics. The paper interprets the state variable of the Qi fourwing chaotic system as an angular momentum and decomposes the vector field of function into inertial torque, internal torque, dissipative torque and external torque. The Hamiltonian energy consisting of kinetic energy and potential energy, dissipation is discovered which analogs those in the rigid body or fluid dynamics. Different dynamical modes are exposed from the combination of different torques.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Sect. 2 analyzes the mechanics of Qi four-wing chaotic system in terms of Kolmogorov system. Section 3 gives different dynamic modes by combining torques. A conclusion is made in Sect. 4.